\documentclass[floatsintext,man]{apa6}

\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{mathspec}
    \usepackage{xltxtra,xunicode}
  \else
    \usepackage{fontspec}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Mapping=tex-text,Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \newcommand{\euro}{â‚¬}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{\usepackage{microtype}}{}

% Table formatting
\usepackage{longtable, booktabs}
\usepackage{lscape}
% \usepackage[counterclockwise]{rotating}   % Landscape page setup for large tables
\usepackage{multirow}		% Table styling
\usepackage{tabularx}		% Control Column width
\usepackage[flushleft]{threeparttable}	% Allows for three part tables with a specified notes section
\usepackage{threeparttablex}            % Lets threeparttable work with longtable

% Create new environments so endfloat can handle them
% \newenvironment{ltable}
%   {\begin{landscape}\begin{center}\begin{threeparttable}}
%   {\end{threeparttable}\end{center}\end{landscape}}

\newenvironment{lltable}
  {\begin{landscape}\begin{center}\begin{ThreePartTable}}
  {\end{ThreePartTable}\end{center}\end{landscape}}




% The following enables adjusting longtable caption width to table width
% Solution found at http://golatex.de/longtable-mit-caption-so-breit-wie-die-tabelle-t15767.html
\makeatletter
\newcommand\LastLTentrywidth{1em}
\newlength\longtablewidth
\setlength{\longtablewidth}{1in}
\newcommand\getlongtablewidth{%
 \begingroup
  \ifcsname LT@\roman{LT@tables}\endcsname
  \global\longtablewidth=0pt
  \renewcommand\LT@entry[2]{\global\advance\longtablewidth by ##2\relax\gdef\LastLTentrywidth{##2}}%
  \@nameuse{LT@\roman{LT@tables}}%
  \fi
\endgroup}


\ifxetex
  \usepackage[setpagesize=false, % page size defined by xetex
              unicode=false, % unicode breaks when used with xetex
              xetex]{hyperref}
\else
  \usepackage[unicode=true]{hyperref}
\fi
\hypersetup{breaklinks=true,
            pdfauthor={},
            pdftitle={Typing and Talking},
            colorlinks=true,
            citecolor=blue,
            urlcolor=blue,
            linkcolor=black,
            pdfborder={0 0 0}}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls

\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
%\setlength{\parskip}{0pt plus 0pt minus 0pt}

\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines


% Manuscript styling
\captionsetup{font=singlespacing,justification=justified}
\usepackage{csquotes}
\usepackage{upgreek}



\usepackage{tikz} % Variable definition to generate author note

% fix for \tightlist problem in pandoc 1.14
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}

% Essential manuscript parts
  \title{Typing and Talking}

  \shorttitle{Crosstalk during typing}


  \author{Matthew J. C. Crump\textsuperscript{1,2}, Nicholaus Brosowsky\textsuperscript{2}, \& Lawrence Behmer\textsuperscript{1}}

  % \def\affdep{{"", "", ""}}%
  % \def\affcity{{"", "", ""}}%

  \affiliation{
    \vspace{0.5cm}
          \textsuperscript{1} Brooklyn College of the City University of New York\\
          \textsuperscript{2} Graduate Center of the City University of New York  }

  \authornote{
    \url{https://github.com/CrumpLab/TalkTyping} is the github repository
    for this project, which was conceived and completed entirely in public.
    The repository contains the data, source code for compiling the analysis
    and modeling scripts in R, source code for compiling this paper in R
    using papaja, and the version controlled history of our discussions and
    work across the project.
    
    Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Matthew J.
    C. Crump, Brooklyn College of CUNY, 2900 Bedford Avenue, Brooklyn, NY,
    11210. E-mail:
    \href{mailto:mcrump@brooklyn.cuny.edu}{\nolinkurl{mcrump@brooklyn.cuny.edu}}
  }


  \abstract{Enter abstract here. Each new line herein must be indented, like this
line.}
  \keywords{Typing, Language production \\

    \indent Word count: X
  }





\usepackage{amsthm}
\newtheorem{theorem}{Theorem}
\newtheorem{lemma}{Lemma}
\theoremstyle{definition}
\newtheorem{definition}{Definition}
\newtheorem{corollary}{Corollary}
\newtheorem{proposition}{Proposition}
\theoremstyle{definition}
\newtheorem{example}{Example}
\theoremstyle{definition}
\newtheorem{exercise}{Exercise}
\theoremstyle{remark}
\newtheorem*{remark}{Remark}
\newtheorem*{solution}{Solution}
\begin{document}

\maketitle

\setcounter{secnumdepth}{0}



Language production processes turn ideas into actions. For example,
people use utterances and gestures to convey semantic meaning during
conversation; to preserve ideas in different mediums, such as
hand-writing, typewriting, and dictation; and to plan and guide
cognition and behavior in general. In Vygotszky's () developmental
tradition, children first acquire connections between actions and
outcomes in the world around them with the words spoken to them by their
caregivers, and then internalize the same language system as a tool to
regulate their own cognition and behavior. In adulthood, people continue
to talk out loud and silently to themselves using inner speech, and such
self-directed language production is assumed to continue to regulate
many aspects of cognition and behavior (). For example, in memory, the
phonological loop transfers to-be-remembered information into long-term
memory through short-term rehearsal (Baddeley \& Hitch, 1974). The act
of speaking out loud itself improves future retrieval, as shown by the
production effect (MacLeod et al., 2010); and, the process of naming may
guide category learning by drawing attention toward diagnostic features
(Lupyan,). Verbal recoding can facilitate learning and recall of lengthy
sequences by casting elements into chunks with recallable names (Miller,
1956). In the completion of everyday tasks, Botvinick and Plaut (2004)
argue that verbally coded instructions together with recurrent
associative learning of real-world action sequences provide the control
necessary for accomplishing routine tasks like making coffee or tea.
Among these and other uses, a crowning achievement of language
production is the ability to control the serial order of utterances to
convey meaning in highly complex and flexible ways. In the present work,
we are interested how the verbal process of language production for
speech may or may not be recruited to facilitate manual control of
fingers for sequencing keystrokes during typewriting. In particular, we
investigate the general idea that the sequence production processes
enabling fluent typing are controlled by common word level linguistic
codes used during speech.

We review three perspectives from the typing, language production, and
sequence production literatures that all suggest an important role for
verbal codes to mediate keystroke production in typing. Typing is
assumed to be controlled by hierarchically nested control loops (). The
outer loop relies on language comprehension and production to turn ideas
into words and sentences. Word level-representation are then sent as
goals to an inner loop that controls individual finger movements to
individual keystrokes for each letter in a word. The two loops are
informationally encapsulated modules (), and the outer loop does not
know the details of how the inner loop accomplishes keystrokes ().
However, the two loops must nevertheless be coordinated to accomplish
accurate typing, presumably by intermediate word-level representations.
For example, in Rumelhart \& Norman's (1982) typing model, words cause
parallel activation of letter units in a response scheduling buffer,
which then controls individual keystrokes for all letters in the word.
That model focused on copy-typing, and assumed that word representations
are activated by word-recognition processes operating during reading of
to-be-copied text. In composition typing, word representations could be
activated by overt or covert language production processes, and their
activation would presumably have the same consequence of activating
constituent letters for typing.

People are capable of overt and covert speech, which may be mediated by
a common language production process. For example, according to the
flexible abstraction hypothesis (), the selection of individual phonemes
during covert or overt speech is controlled by a common process with
relatively abstract phonemic codes. These abstract codes retain deep
semantic and lexical features, but lack many of the articulatory
features necessary for speaking out loud. As a result, inner speech may
rely on these more abstract codes, which explains evidence that errors
in overt speech can be driven more by lexical than phonemic similarity
(). At the same time, these abstract codes can be used flexibly and
further modified by articulatory processes that fill in necessary
additional features to achieve overt speech. Although the flexible
abstraction hypothesis is concerned mainly with speech overt and covert
speech production, it is worth considering whether it extends to
nonverbal language production such as typing. For example, the same
abstract verbal codes mediating inner speech may be co-opted and further
specified by motor processes controlling finger movements to achieve
accurate and fluid keystroke production. Sequence production more
generally may also be mediated by verbal codes that trigger a plan-based
mode of action control distinct from a more automatic stimulus-based
mode of control (). For example, a stimulus-based mode of control refers
to actions triggered in an automatic, reflex-like manner in response to
well-learned cues from the environment. Whereas, a plan-based mode of
control refers to goal-driven cognitive processes that set and supervise
motor programs for complex sequencing of actions. Evidence for a
distinction between control modes comes from the serial reaction time
task (SRT, Nissen \& Bullemer, 1987). The major finding from SRT tasks
is that subjects learn to respond faster to targets that are presented
in repeating or probabilistic sequences compared to random sequences,
even if they are unable to explicitly describe the sequential
regularities. At the same time, whether reaction times are sensitive to
the frequency of particular targets or first-order transitions (e.g.,
repetitions or alternations) appears to depend on whether subjects
possess explicit knowledge about sequential regularities in the task.
For example, in a task where alternations were three times more likely
than repetitions, subjects who were not aware of the manipulation showed
faster responses to the more frequent alternations than repetitions,
whereas subjects who were aware of the manipulation were equally fast
for alternations and repetitions. One interpretation is that explicit
knowledge of the transition probabilities allowed subjects to adopt a
control-based mode, enabling action plans to mediate responses rather
than more automatic frequency sensitive learning processes. Using a
similar task, Tubau, Hommel, \& LÃ³pez-Moliner (2007) further showed that
subjects were more likely to adopt a plan-based mode (as evidenced by
the elimination of the alternation benefit) when visual/verbal targets
were used and when responses where followed by sounds, and plan-based
control was disrupted when auditory noise was introduced. They suggested
that use of phonemic codes in general may strongly influence subjects to
adopt a plan-based vs.~stimulus-based mode of action control.

Several lines of evidence suggest that verbal codes for speech
production participate in manual control over keystrokes during typing.
Typing speed is fastest for words and decreases as letter strings
approach random texts (). This effect of string structure could simply
reflect familiarity and prior experience with typing words compared to
random letter sequences, but could also be driven by string
pronounceability. For example, typing speed is also influenced by
syllabic structure, with faster interkeystroke times for letters within
versus between syllables in a word. Word-level representations may also
have a special status in activating all constituent letters in parallel
compared to non-words which do not activate all letters in a sequence
(). Finally, lexical structure at the level of bigrams appears to
influence the spatial precision with which typists locate keys during
typing (). This evidence is consistent with the idea that typists use
verbal codes in a straightforward manner during typing, by concurrently
using their inner voice (and perhaps sometimes speaking out loud) to say
the same words they are typing.

Other work looking at dual-task interference in typing suggests that
fast and accurate typing may not necessarily depend on using verbal
codes. Protection from dual-task interference is often interpreted as
evidence that is a skill is highly automatized, and typing in general
appears to be highly automatized. For example, typing speed in a dual
task-condition to identify auditory tones with a foot-pedal was only 4ms
slower than normal typing. Remarkably, Shaffer (1975) showed that typing
speed was mostly unaffected under concurrent task demands to recite an
unrelated nursery rhyme while typing. However, typing speed was slowed
substantially when typists copied spoken words while simultaneously
reading unrelated visually presented text. And, these data were
collected only from a single skilled typist, and whether the result is
generalizable remains unclear. On the one hand, if the same verbal codes
used for speech are used for typing, it is surprising that a typist
could easily type one set of words while saying another set of words out
loud without interference. On the other hand, interference appears to
depend on the details of how verbal codes are used, as interference was
observed when typists attempted to read unrelated text while copying
spoken words.

The purpose of the present work is to clarify whether and how typists
use verbal codes during typing. One possibility is that verbal codes for
speech do not participate directly in the control of keystrokes for
typing. On this view, typing could be considered a highly automatized
and modularized skill that runs largely independently from other
language production processes. Although speaking and typing may often go
hand in hand, as many typists report silently voicing the words they are
typing while they produce text (see Experiment 1), overt or covert
speech production during typing could be carried out independently and
in parallel with the motor movements required for typing. Another
general possibility is that typists co-opt existing speech production
processes during typing, so that normal typing is deeply connected at
some level to a common language production process. We test these two
general ideas in a series of related typing tasks that manipulate what
typists say while they are typing. A central empirical aim was to tax
concurrent speech production processes with reciting relevant or
irrelevant content during copy-typing. In this way, we could establish
boundary conditions for observing interference (or the lack thereof)
from speech production on keystroke production.

In Experiment 1a and 1b we had typists speak the words or letters they
were typing either silently or out loud. This experiment tested the idea
that typists use verbal codes at the word rather than letter level
during typing. The remaining experiments investigated the extent to
which typing performance can be impaired by disrupting normal speech
production. Experiment 2 measured copy-typing performance across several
verbal suppression conditions where typists were instructed to repeat
words or letter (unrelated to the text they were copying) out loud as
they typed. Experiment 3 measured copy-typing performance under
conditions of delayed auditory feedback, which is known to disrupt
fluent speech.

\subsection{Overview of present study}\label{overview-of-present-study}

\section{Experiment 1a and 1b: Speaking words or letters during
typing}\label{experiment-1a-and-1b-speaking-words-or-letters-during-typing}

The immediate goal of typing is to produce letters in the correct order
during word and sentence production. Based on the idea that verbal codes
are used during typing, we assumed that typists routinely verbalize,
either covertly or overtly, aspects of the letters they are typing. For
example, as I type this sentence, my subjective experience is that I
silently voice the words I am typing. In Experiment 1a, we asked typists
recruited online from Amazon's mechanical turk to copy-type a paragraph
under two conditions to silently voice each word as they typed, or
silently voice each letter as they typed. To gain an understanding of
the subjective experience of using the inner voice during typing, we
also asked typists to report what their inner voice usually says during
typing (e.g., words, letters, both, or none). Because we had no way of
controlling whether our subjects adopted our instructions, we conducted
Experiment 1b as a lab-based replication and extension of Experiment 1a.
Here, subjects copied five paragraphs. The first paragraph involved only
the instruction to copy-type as quickly and accurately as possible.
Across the remaining four paragraphs we manipulated whether subjects
spoke out loud or silently to themselves, combined factorially with
whether they spoke words or letters during typing. If typists use verbal
codes at the word level during typing, then we expected that typing
speed should be faster when subjects were instructed to say words rather
than letters as they typed.

\subsection{Methods}\label{methods}

\subsubsection{Subjects}\label{subjects}

In experiment 1a, 50 subjects were recruited from AMT and compensated
\$0.25 for participating in the approximately 5 minute task. 40 subjects
completed the task and were included in the analysis. In experiment 1b,
16 subjects were recruited from the undergraduate population at Brooklyn
College, and received course credit for their participation. One subject
was not included in the analysis because they repeatedly typed
\enquote{asdf}, rather than completing the task.

\subsubsection{Apparatus \& Stimuli}\label{apparatus-stimuli}

For experiment 1a, typing tests were programmed for the online
environment using HTML and JavaScript and conducted in subjects'
web-browsers. For experiment 1b, typing tests were conducted on an iMac
(21" screen) controlled by LIVECODE software. Typing responses were
registered on a standard QWERTY keyboard. Each paragraph in the typing
task involved copy-typing short paragraphs (\textasciitilde{}115 words
length), taken from Logan and Zbrodoff (1998).

\subsubsection{Design and Procedure}\label{design-and-procedure}

During the task, participants were shown each paragraph in a text box.
Paragraph text was black and presented in 14pt, Helvetica font. In
general, participants were instructed to begin typing with the first
letter in the paragraph. Correctly typed letters turned green, and
typists could only proceed to the next by typing the current letter
correctly. For each of the different typing conditions, subjects were
presented with the following instructions.

For experiment 1a, the instructions read: This experiment tests how you
your inner voice influences your typing ability. When you type this
paragraph, use your inner voice to say each word (or letter in the
letter condition) that you type. At the beginning of the experiment,
subjects were also asked to choose whether they use their inner voice
during typing to speak either words or letters.

For experiment 1b, in the speak aloud condition, the instructions read:
When you type this paragraph, speak aloud each word (or letter in the
letter condition) that you type. In the inner voice condition, the
instructions were identical to experiment 1a. At the beginning of the
experiment, subjects were given a short questionnaire about how they use
their inner voice during typing. The questionnaire stated
\enquote{People have the ability to use their inner voice to speak
silently to themselves. We are interested in how you use your inner
voice while you are typing. Please estimate the percentage of times that
your inner voice is engaged in each of the following tasks while typing,
and make sure your numbers add up to 100.}. The four tasks were: a)
inner voice is silent, b) inner voice speaks words that you are typing,
c) inner voice speaks letters that you are typing, d) inner voice speaks
other words or letters that you are not typing.

\subsubsection{Data analysis and
pre-processing}\label{data-analysis-and-pre-processing}

We used R (Version 3.4.2; R Core Team, 2017) and the R-package
\emph{papaja} (Version 0.1.0.9655; Aust \& Barth, 2017) for all our
analyses.

For each subject, we applied the following pre-processing steps. We
included IKSIs only for keystrokes involving a lower case letter, and
only for correct keystrokes that were preceded by a correct keystroke.
Outlier IKSIs were removed for each subject, on a cell-by-cell basis,
using the ({\textbf{???}}) non-recursive moving criterion procedure,
which eliminated approximately X\% of IKSIs from further analysis.

\subsection{Results}\label{results}

\subsubsection{Experiment 1a}\label{experiment-1a}

Mean IKSIs for correctly typed letters were computed for each subject in
each condition and submitted to a one-way repeated measures ANOVA with
inner voice task condition (words vs.~letters) as the sole factor. Mean
IKSIs in the word condition (174 ms) were significantly faster than the
letter condition (224 ms), F(1, 39) = 33.39 , MSE = 1474.36 , p
\textless{} .001. A corresponding analysis of error rates showed no
significant differences between word (.04) and letter (.05) conditions,
F\textless{}1.

Additionally, subjects were asked if their inner voice usually thinks in
words or letters when they type, and 93\% of subject reported thinking
in words during typing.

\subsubsection{Experiment 1b}\label{experiment-1b}

Mean IKSIs for correctly typed letters were computed for each subject in
each condition and submitted to a 2 (Speech type: out loud vs.~silent) x
2 (Task: words vs.~letters) repeated measures ANOVA.

Only the main effect of task was significant, F (1, 14) = 43.38, MSE =
3775.74, p \textless{} .001. Again, mean IKSIs in the word condition
(197 ms) were faster than the letter condition (301 ms). The main effect
of speech type was not significant, and neither was the two-way
interaction.

A corresponding analysis of error rates found only a small but
significant main effect of task, F (1, 14) = 6.96, MSE = .0015, p =
0.019. Mean error rates were slightly higher in the word (.12) than
letter conditions (.09).

The mean responses for the inner voice questionnaire were that subjects'
inner voice was silent 3\%, said words 69\%, said letters 16\%, or said
unrelated words or letters 12\% of the time during typing.

\subsection{Discussion}\label{discussion}

The main finding from both experiments was that mean typing speed was
much faster when subjects covertly or overtly said the words they were
typing rather than the letters they were typing. The behavioral data was
also supported by the questionnaire data which showed that most subjects
claim to use their inner voice to say the words they are typing rather
than say letters, unrelated words or letters, or nothing at all. This
finding is consistent with the idea that verbal codes at the word level
are important mediators of keystroke production during typing.

\section{Experiment 2: Verbal
Suppression}\label{experiment-2-verbal-suppression}

Verbal suppression techniques are commonly used in memory studies to
prevent subjects from using their inner voice to verbally code and
rehearse to-be-remembered information. The technique usually involves
asking subjects to repeatedly recite a word or phrase out loud during
the rehearsal period. As a result, verbal processes are occupied by the
reciting the word, and presumed to be unavailable for rehearsing
information in working memory. Experiment 2 asked whether similar verbal
suppression techniques would also disrupt typing performance. We had
subjects copy-type one of six paragraphs under one normal condition, and
five verbal suppression conditions. Each verbal suppression condition
had typists say words or letters out loud while they typed. These
conditions included: a) repeating the word \enquote{the}, b) repeating
the words Tuesday and Thursday, c) repeating the letters of the alphabet
in order, d) repeating randomly chosen letters, and e) counting
backwards from X.

\subsection{Methods}\label{methods-1}

\subsubsection{Subjects}\label{subjects-1}

15 subjects were recruited from the undergraduate population at Brooklyn
College, and received course credit for their participation.

\subsubsection{Apparatus \& Stimuli.}\label{apparatus-stimuli.}

The same apparatus and stimuli from Experiment 1b were used in
Experiment 2.

\subsubsection{Design and Procedure.}\label{design-and-procedure.}

The same general typing test procedure from Experiment 1b was used, with
the exception that typists copied six paragraphs. The instructions for
each of the conditions were as follows:

\begin{verbatim}
Normal Typing instructions:
Say the instructions:
Say Tuesday/Thursday instructions:
Say alphabet instructions:
Say random letters instructions:
Count instructions:
\end{verbatim}

\subsection{Results}\label{results-1}

Mean IKSIs for correctly typed letters were computed for each subject in
each condition and submitted to a one-way repeated measures ANOVA with
Suppression condition (Normal, The, Tuesday/Thursday, Alphabet, Random,
and Count) as the sole factor. Mean IKSIs in each condition are
displayed in table 2.

The main effect of Suppression was significant, F () = , MSE = , p
\textless{} . Post-hoc tests showed that all mean IKSIs in all
suppression conditions were significantly slower than the mean IKSI in
the normal typing condition. Additionally, X was X etc.

\section{General Discussion}\label{general-discussion}

\newpage

\section{References}\label{references}

\begingroup
\setlength{\parindent}{-0.5in} \setlength{\leftskip}{0.5in}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\hypertarget{ref-R-papaja}{}
Aust, F., \& Barth, M. (2017). \emph{papaja: Create APA manuscripts with
R Markdown}. Retrieved from \url{https://github.com/crsh/papaja}

\hypertarget{ref-R-base}{}
R Core Team. (2017). \emph{R: A language and environment for statistical
computing}. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Retrieved from \url{https://www.R-project.org/}

\endgroup






\end{document}
